# How to be a team open science player
## How to contribute to Open Ontologies, Data and Software beyond coding and curation

Traditionally, we consider software code and ontology/data curation as the most valuable contributions in our domain. However, there are many other ways to positively influence and impact the long-term trajectory of our community. Here, we explain how to be a "team open science player" - independent of wether you are a software engineer, and ontology curator, a data scientist or a user.

1. When you find an answer on Stack Overflow (or similar) that helps you, *upvote it*. It cannot be stressed enough how important this is to let good answers float up to the top (become more visible), and recognise the time and energy people spend formulating answers.
1. If you cannot find an answer to a question on Stack Overflow, and you figure out a solution consider answering it yourself! Consider this: if you provide an answer that will result in only 6 open science people spending one hour less solving a problem (a conservative estimate), you saved the taxpayer 6 hours of salary (not to speak of improving the quality of the solutions)!
1. Answer questions on GitHub issues even when on trackers not in your purview. People often falsely assume that they should not try to answer queries in an open source project that they are not directly involved with. This is wrong! Open source developers highly (!) appreciate it when you chip in on answering queries, from dealing with errors and exceptions to "How do I?" kind of queries. **Get involved on other peoples issue trackers**!
1. Before asking questions on slack or issue trackers, **always do basic search first**. Consider (1) the projects documentation, (2) open _and closed_ issues on the issue tracker of the project your query is related to. If you do not find the information you need try and craft questions that are concise yet give sufficient context. To enable future users to find these answers, consider using the issue tracker instead of slack!
1. Make yourself responsible for continuously improving open science documentation: from software tools to libraries and ontologies, we are all in this together. If a question was answered on slack or in an issue, consider a 10 minute detour to update the documentation of the project to reflect the solution if you think it could be helpful!
1. Good documentation is as important as good quality code, and everyone can help our here even if it "only" about formatting, typos and adding additional links!
