# DOSDP - Quick Quide

 Dead Simple OWL Design patterns (DOSDP) is a templating system for documenting and generating new OWL classes.  The templates themselves are designed to be human readable and easy to author.  Separate tables (TSV files) are used to specify individual classes.

## Anatomy of a dosdp file:

### Pattern level keys:

[Reference doc](https://github.com/INCATools/dead_simple_owl_design_patterns/blob/master/docs/dosdp_schema.md#properties)

A set of fields that specify general information about a pattern: name, description, IRI, contributors, examples etc

e.g.

```YAML
pattern_name: abnormalAnatomicalEntity
pattern_iri: http://purl.obolibrary.org/obo/upheno/patterns/abnormalAnatomicalEntity.yaml
description: "Any unspecified abnormality of an anatomical entity."

contributors:
  - https://orcid.org/0000-0002-9900-7880
```

### Dictionaries.

[Reference doc](https://github.com/INCATools/dead_simple_owl_design_patterns/blob/master/docs/dosdp_schema.md#owl-entity-dictionaries)

A major aim of the DOSDP system is to produce self-contained, human-readable templates. Templates need IDs in order to be reliably used programatically, but templates that only use IDs are not human readable. DODSPs therefore include a set of dictionaries that map labels to IDs. Strictly any readable name can be used, but by convention we use class labels.  IDs must be  OBO curie style e.g. CL:0000001).

Separate dictionaries are required for classes, relations (object properties) & AnnotationProperties

e.g.

```yaml
classes:
  quality: PATO:0000001
  abnormal: PATO:0000460
  anatomical entity: UBERON:0001062

relations:
  inheres_in_part_of: RO:0002314
  has_modifier: RO:0002573
  has_part: BFO:0000051
```

### Variables

[Reference doc](https://github.com/INCATools/dead_simple_owl_design_patterns/blob/master/docs/dosdp_schema.md#var-types)

These fields specify the names of pattern variables (TSV column names) and map these to a range. e.g. This specifies a variable called 'anatomy' with the range 'anatomical entity':

```yaml
vars:
  anatomy: "'anatomical entity'"
```

The var name (anatomy) corresponds to a column name in the table (TSV file) used in combination with this template, to generate new terms based on the template.  The range specifies what type of term is allowed in this column - in this case 'anatomical entity' (UBERON:0001062) or one of its subclasses, e.g.-

| anatomy |
|--|
| UBERON:0001154 |

There are various [types of variables](https://github.com/INCATools/dead_simple_owl_design_patterns/blob/master/docs/dosdp_schema.md#var-types):

`vars` are used to specify OWL classes (see example above). data_vars and data_list_vars are used to specify single pieces or data lists respectively.  The range of data_vars is specified using XSD types. e.g.

```YAML
data_vars:
  number: xsd:int

data_list_vars:
  xrefs: xsd:string
```

A table used to specify classes following this pattern could have the following content.  Note that in lists, multiple elements are separated by a '|'.

| number | xrefs |
|--|--|
| 1 | pubmed:123456\|DOI:10.1016/j.cell.2016.07.054|

### Template fields:

Template fields are where the content of classes produced by the template is specified.  These mostly follow [printf format](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Printf_format_string):  A `text` field has variable slots specified using %s (for strings),  %d for integers and %f for floats (decimals).  Variables slots are filled, in order of appearance in the text, with values coming from a list of variables in an associated `vars` field e.g.

```yaml
name:
  text: "%s of %s"
  vars:
    - neuron
    - brain_region
```
 
If the value associated with the neuron var is (the class) 'glutamatergic neuron' and the value associated with the = 'brain region' var is 'primary motor cortext', this will generate a classes with the name (label) "glutamatergic neuron of primary motor cortex".

#### OBO fields

[Reference doc](https://github.com/INCATools/dead_simple_owl_design_patterns/blob/master/docs/dosdp_schema.md#obo-fields)

DOSDPs include a set of convenience fields for annotation of classes that follow OBO conventions for field names and their mappings to OWL annotation properties.  These include `name`, `def`, `comment`, `namespace`. When the value of a var is an OWL class, the name (label) of the var is used in the substitution. (see example above).

The annotation axioms generated by these template fields can be [annotated](). One OBO field exists for this purpose: `xrefs` allows annotation with a list of references using the obo standard xref annotation property (curies) 

e.g. 

```yaml
data_list_vars:
  xrefs: xsd:string
  
def:
  text: "Any %s that has a soma located in the %s"
  vars:
    - neuron
    - brain_region
  xrefs: xrefs
```

##### Adding synonyms:

A special set of OBO fields are dedicated to specifying synonyms:

generated_synonyms:

#### logical Convenience fields

[Reference doc](https://github.com/INCATools/dead_simple_owl_design_patterns/blob/master/docs/dosdp_schema.md#logical-convenience-fields)

Where a single equivalent Class, subclassof or GCI axiom is specified, you may use the keys 'EquivalentTo', 'subClassOf' or 'GCI' respectively.  If mutiple axioms of any type are needed, use the core field [logical_axioms].

### Core fields

```YAML

annotations:
  - annotationProperty: 
    text:
    vars:
    annotations:
      ...
  - annotationProperty:
    text:
    vars:
  

logical_axioms:
  - axiom_type: subClassOf
    text:
    vars:
      -
      - 
  - axiom_type: subClassOf
    text:
    vars:
      - 
      - 
    annotations:
      - ...
```

### Advanced usage:

#### Optionals and multiples (0-many)

TBA

### ODK usage 

_maybe split this into separate doc_

